this term sex pan which I've never heard
before what is that sex span is how long
you are able to engage in satisfying
sexual activity and most men most women
want their sex fan to last as long as
their lifespan and there's many things
you can do that significantly prolong
your sex fan and I called it the four
pillars so let's talk about sex Dr moit
Cara is a board certified urologist and
Professor who specializes in male and
female sexual dysfunction his
groundbreaking research has
significantly contributed to improving
sexual health and fertility millions of
men and women are suffering from sexual
problems like infertility and sexual
dysfunction for example in the US
roughly 43 to 48% of women suffer from
female sexual dysfunction which involves
four components that we're going to talk
about but we also know that premature
ejaculation affects 30% of men globally
and also 40% of men at 40 will suffer
from erectile dysfunction and it's the
first sign of other major adverse
medical problems for example 66% have
some degree of depression and 15% of
them will have a heart attack or stroke
within 7 years and if you look at the
causes for Ed one of the biggest factors
is obesity which causes the testosterone
levels to go down but men need
testosterone for sexual functions so do
women because low testosterone increases
low Lio but the issue is people don't
talk about their sexual problems they
suffer in silence and they start
avoiding sex but it's curable and I have
two ways to raise their testosterone
techniques to significantly improve the
quality of your directions and natural
ways to improve sexual function in men
and women so number one most important
is this has always blown my mind a
little bit 53% of you that listen to the
show regularly haven't yet subscribed to
the show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much
Dr Mo
Hera who are you and what have you spent
your life doing so I'm a urologist and I
specialize in male and female sexual
dysfunction testosterone replacement
therapy and infertility for the past 17
years I've been working as a professor
at Baya College of Medicine Houston
looking at ways to improve sexual health
improve testosterone and improve
fertility and we talked just before we
started recording about this term sex
pan which I've never heard before what
is the sex pan and why do you care about
it yeah so Stephen you know what
lifespan is it's how long you're going
to live right and you also know what
health span is how long you're going to
live in a healthy lifestyle but you may
not have heard of the concept of sex
span sex span is the ability to engage
in sexual activity satisfying sexual
activity and so how long you are able to
engage in sexual activity is important
to most men right um so let's give you
an example the average lifespan in the
United States is 77 years old the
average Health Span in the United States
believe it or not is 67 years old in
fact if you look at the CDC and they
talk about how long you'll live without
a disability it's actually 63 so there's
a Delta here there's at least 10 15
years where you will be in some kind of
disability and cannot live to your
fullest now think about the concept of
sex span how long you'll have the
ability to engage in sexual activity
satisfying sexual ity we most men most
women want their sex span and their
health span to last as long as their
lifespan yes so I think it's
important and there's things that I can
do to make my sex span last as long as
my lifespan there's many things you can
do and I call it the four pillars the
first is Diet exercise sleep and stress
reduction I don't have a pill on the
planet stronger than diet exercise sleep
and stress reduction and each one of
those can significantly improve a man
and a woman's sex span but also their
health span and their lifespan the other
is hormones testosterone extremely
important testosterone supplementation
can significantly improve a man and a
woman's sexual function and fortunately
for women in the United States we don't
have very many options actually globally
for women there's not many options um
but I think it's important a hormone
replacement therapy and I one more thing
I think about the couple think about sex
ban as a couple's disease let me give
you an example tomorrow Stephen are are
you married or yeah well I'm in a
long-term relationship you're your
partner so let's say your partner
tomorrow says to you I am no longer
going to have sex with you unless uh you
cheat on her or you leave her you're not
going to have sex again right think
about the importance of the couple um so
I talk about this quite often keep your
partner engaged keep your partner
healthy if you want to prolong your sex
fan so I got two questions here the
first of which is who have you worked
with in your career and the second
question is what is your CV give me a
rundown of your professional experience
yeah so I started my residency in 2000
and uh I did my residency in 2 one year
of general surgery I did five years of
Urology training and then I did one year
of a fellowship in men's health soon as
I finished my training I joined uh the
University at Baylor College of Medicine
and I started a basic science laboratory
where we do a basic science research in
sexual medicine and testosterone for the
past 17 years and I just started a
clinical trial so I start have a
clinical arm we do clinical research I
see approximately 150 patients a week
every week I do approximately 68
surgeries every week and I still work at
the VA hospital it's a veteran
government Hospital one half day a week
working with the veterans so it's quite
busy um but you know my passion really
is education research and clinical care
and um and that's what we do and so you
know when I started my where how I
really got into this was when I finished
my training I was so proud of myself I
was able to get these men these amazing
erections these great libidos and uh I
realized one day this woman called me
and she was frantic and she said look uh
you're treating my husband you're able
to get him these great erections great
libido but I don't want to have sex with
him and he wants to have sex with me all
the time and now we have a terrible
relationship you've ruined our
relationship and I thought to myself
wait a minute uh you know I this doesn't
make sense but she was right you know in
in sexual medicine either leave both Le
low or raise them both but don't raise
one or the other it's a setup for
disaster so very quickly that year I
went out and flew out to meet with Dr
Irwin Goldstein who's considered one of
the Godfathers of female sexual
dysfunction spent some time with him
went to his courses and for the past 16
years I've been treating women as well
you can't just treat one patient without
addressing the other and so therefore
it's a couple's disease and give me a
flavor of the types of conversations you
have on day one when they walk into your
practice when they come to see you what
is the issue that they say they have and
how do they express it like what are the
words that they use and if you could
just give me like five of the most
popular things people say to you when
they come to see you so listen first of
all men and women are very different how
they express it you know so we'll talk
with men most men uh let's backtrack
most men and women do not get any kind
of medical care when they see their
primary GP in fact most GPS don't
address sexual dysfunction there was a
study looking at medical students only
65% % of us medical students get
training in sexual medicine and of those
65 50% of those students said that the
training was terrible so we don't get
the sexual medicine training to address
the problem for patients so the majority
of patients are never uh discussed about
their sexual problems but when men come
in there's a most of them are coming in
because they already have tried some
medications that haven't worked and
they're looking for other Solutions now
there's a very two simple questions you
can ask a man they're very
straightforward are you able to get an
erection sufficient for penetration it's
either yes or no are you able to
maintain that erection to orgasm or
pleasure it's either yes or no if he
answers no to either one of those
questions he suffers from erectile
dysfunction right and so it's very
important to get a detailed history you
want to ask particularly are you able to
get an erection on your own are you able
to get erection with masturbation do you
wake up with morning erections if he
says look doc I get great morning
erections or with masturbation I have
great erections then this has to be
psychogenic right with my partner I
cannot get an erection but when I'm by
myself everything works fine psychogenic
psychogenic Ed it's a big component what
is psychogenic many something in the
mind that's bothering you or inhibiting
you from engaging in sexual activity and
that's where the sex therapist comes in
right because if I if someone tells you
I get great erections uh by myself but
with my partner I'm not able to get good
erections psychologically when with
their whe they're with their partner
they're not able to achieve a good
erection sex for men and women has a
huge psychogenic component
a huge psychogenic component so I think
it's very important to get detailed
history are they able to get direction
what did they try what medications have
they tried you know you have to query
about
depression 66% of men who come in with
Ed have some degree of depression 66%
right and that's important anxiety 35%
is very important and more importantly
we'll talk about this Ed is the first
sign of other major adverse medical
problems for example if a man comes into
my office today 15% of them will have a
heart attack or a stroke within 7 years
15% the day they get Ed 15% will have a
heart attack or a stroke within seven
years it's the first sign other studies
Dr monori showed that if a man presents
the emergency room with a heart attack
on average 39 months earlier that's when
the Ed started so it is the first sign
now there are many reasons for this one
theory is called the arterial diameter
Theory the penal arteries are the
smallest arteries 1 to 2 mm
the coronary arteries are 3 to 4 mm the
kateed 6 to 7 mm so if you remember from
physiology if you're going to block an
artery 50% occlusion of an artery causes
a damage so if you're going to block an
artery you're going to block the penina
arteries before the coronary arteries
you're going to block the coronary
arteries before you block the kateed
right so men will get Ed before they get
a heart attack more more likely to get a
heart attack before they get a stroke
that's a theory but it makes sense so I
worry when a man comes into my office
could this man have a cult
cardiovascular disease in fact there was
a wonderful study that came out of
Greece they looked at 50 men that walked
in and they gave them an echocardiogram
or stress test if it was positive they
wanted onto a coronary angiogram what
they found is that roughly 20% of men
one in five actually had some occlusion
in their heart whether it was one vessel
two vessel or three vessel disease so I
think to myself every time I'm writing
that prescription is this one of the
five that could have occlusion and is
there opportunity to intervene at this
point so it's really important to think
about cardiovascular disease as well one
of the big subjects that I hear a lot
about even in my friendship groups is
about libido I've I've got so many
stories in my friendship group of either
one or both Partners losing their libido
so on this subject matter of libido is
kind of where I wanted to start this
conversation what is the most frequent
and popular reason why men and women
struggle with libido problems and
how much of of that is about
compatibility yeah good question libido
is multifactorial there's many pieces of
libido it's very complex and I'll give
you some important components first it
could be hormonal and the pneumonic I
teach the residents is pet the four
hormones that can affect someone's
libido are prolactin estrogen thyroid
and testosterone so you have to check
the pet if the prolactin is elevated the
libido goes down the testosterone's low
the libido goes down so maybe it's a
hormonal issue which could be it and
particularly many women who go through
menopause suffer from hormonal issues
and it could be a hormonal issue the
second is something called
neurotransmitters so in other words
serotonin norepinephrine dopamine
dopamine goes up libido goes up
serotonin goes up libido goes down so
these all regulate how someone's libido
will function so one of the biggest um
uh culprits for low libido are
anti-depressants what do
anti-depressants do they increase
serotonin and they decrease libido so
sometimes it's a medication or something
that a patient's taking that will shut
down their libido for example a
medication that men take for urinary
function called finasteride shuts down
their libbido so that is there are
certain things that you have to look at
the other components are um lifestyle
diet exercise sleep and stress reduction
particularly fatigue and stress if a
woman is tired and she's exhausted and
she has to between sex and sleeping at
night many times she may choose sleep if
me as well right I'm just saying so
fatigue is important stress and there's
this cliche this pneumonic this this
saying that um with stress is kind of
interesting typically if a man has a
very stressful day he will want to have
sex to relieve his stress uh women have
to relieve their stress to engage in
sexual activity it's kind of the
opposite you know what I mean so I tell
men if you really want to have sex with
your wife uh do the dish just take out
the trash H do everything you can to
tuck the kids in bed early relieve her
stress because that will significantly
increase her desire to engage in sexual
activity but the other one is uh
psychogenic so you know we talked about
that earlier you know sex has a huge
mental component your relationship with
your partner your uh your the how close
you feel with your partner so sometimes
patients come to me and they're an
abusive relationship and say and they
say give me the pill that improves my
libido I said I it's not going to work I
mean the the essence the core the
foundation is not working and therefore
it's really important for them to see a
sex therapist one thing for men that
actually shuts down their libido is when
they start developing erectile
dysfunction so if a man starts getting
erectile dysfunction let's say he gets a
good erection 50% of the time and he's
starting to have some problems and it's
10 o'clock at night and he says look I
can try to engage in sexual activity but
it may or not work and it may be
frustrating and embarrassing or I can
just go to sleep it's probably just
going to go to sleep right and it
becomes a vicious cycle because the less
sex he has the more difficult it is to
engage in sexual activity later on and
so you may interpret this as a low
libido but he's really just avoiding it
because he doesn't want to deal with it
right but the partner also uh looks at
this as maybe I'm not attractive anymore
maybe there's something about me that's
not appealing and it becomes a vicious
cycle so one thing you can do is
significantly improve the quality of the
erections in a man and that actually
helps improve his libido so for example
if I tell a man if every night you uh
have anere great erection and every
morning you wake up with a great
erection what are you going to probably
do probably going to use it right so
libido inherently goes up right so I
think e Ed and libido are tied very
closely how do you define the Tam labido
in simp it's a desire to engage in
sexual activity right for men and women
and you have to you know when it's a
true problem they have to be bothered by
the condition so I just want to be very
clear there are women who have low
libido and say I really don't care I'm
happy that I have a low libido well then
it's not an issue right you have to be
bothered by the issue so on this
psychogenic element where it becomes a
vicious cycle I've seen this in my own
life um several times Well at least once
and I've seen it in some of my friends
where because there's a bedroom issue
when you go to the
bedroom you're both a little bit anxious
and then one of you can't perform and if
you can't perform it exacerbates the
issue and it creates this sort of
vicious downward spiral of like it makes
the bedroom like a really awkward place
to be and this is how I think about when
you're talking about psychogenic
component so in the in the case of
erectile dysfunction if you're thinking
as a man God if I go to the bedroom I'm
not going to be able to get it hard I'm
not going to keep it up it's going to be
embarrassing she's then going to ask me
questions she's going to think I I'm not
into her which just makes it even harder
because as a man like I perform best
when I'm really not thinking about it
and I'm like not anxious when I'm stress
free right and if seems to me that the
like antithesis the opposite of great
sex is like
overthinking you're 100% correct and
this is what happens let's say a man
gets Ed just one time just one time
young man he says that was really odd
and I I what's wrong you know what he
does next time he has sex as he's having
sex he says to himself I hope I don't
lose my erection I hope I don't lose my
erection the second he says that to
himself as he's having sex he's going to
lose his erection right because he's so
worried that he's going to lose the
erection and not enjoying the experience
so now it's happened twice so now he
engages sex third time and now he's even
more freaked out because it's happened
twice and it happens again we call this
the Vicious Cycle right because the now
sex has become an anxiety event anxiety
provoking event and so you really have
to work on decreasing that anxiety and
not thinking about it that's where Sex
Therapy comes in hand and that's where a
medication called daily Calis has become
unbelievably helpful for my young
patients because daily Calis is a
medication that men take daily you've
heard of Cialis right it's like the
Viagra yeah it's like Viagra right so
there's Viagra there's Calis Levitra
there's stender there's four different
brands but one of the four is meant to
be given daily it's a lower dose 5
milligrams every day and the larger dose
is 20 milligrams when you give a man
Calis 5 milligrams every day what it
does is essentially is having that
medication on board all the time when he
engages in sexual activity he doesn't
have to take a pill he just has has sex
whenever he wants to and I found that to
be unbelievably helpful in Breaking
psychogenic Ed now that's exactly what
that is on the table yeah that's exactly
what it is yeah and so these are these
are these are pills um that are in the
US but what's nice is they used to be
very expensive uh now they if you look
at Mark Cuban and a lot of the uh good
RX um companies they men can get 90
pills for5 or $20 which is very cheap
you use the word young men yes young men
presumably shouldn't be taking pill
shouldn't but what happens when they
have psychogenic Ed cuz they think about
it the most is they need to break the
cycle what's the cost cuz I'm a I'm got
to be honest I'm a pill skeptic yes so I
try and avoid taking pills to solve my
problems if I can right obviously
there's going to be situations where I
can't and I accept that but my bias is
towards figuring out if there's another
way before I take a pill right um
because everything in life comes with a
cost all things yeah so there must be a
cost to taking a pill to solve this
problem well the the actual monetary
cost is unbelievably cheap monetary cost
is I'm thinking about like do I then get
dependent on this do I have to take this
for the rest of my life so so there's no
dependency let me tell you why I think
that drug is so important that daily
seis has one of the only things in my
opinion that actually reverses erectile
dysfunction so let's backtrack I give
you an example let's say today you break
your leg okay I have two options Stephen
I can fix your leg or I can give you
vicadin a narcotic and if I give you the
vicad or the narcotic you'll still be
able to walk until the vicadin no longer
works and we're in trouble Viagra is a
vicadin it is not a cure for your
erectile dysfunction it's just masking
the problem daily seis in my opinion is
one of the few things that helps cure Ed
if you look at studies and you look at a
penal tissue and we biopsy the tissue
and then you biopsy three months later
on daily seals it physically gets
stronger so let's say you go to the gym
today and ask you to lift dumbbells
what's going to happen to your arm it
will hypertrophy with daily seal we see
hypert of the smooth muscle meaning it
gets physically stronger so in my
opinion it's one of the best things to
prevent Ed in the future help reverse
the Ed process more importantly daily
Calis protects the endothelium and we
have to spend some time talking about
that that is the lining of the blood
vessels it's the brains and the lining
of the blood vessels is very important
because once that gets injured you start
getting clot or plaque which will get a
heart attack a stroke and a rectile
dysfunction so it protects the lining of
the blood vessels two other indications
it's FDA approved to help a man urinate
better FDA approved it's FDA approved to
protect the heart in terms of something
called pulmonary hypertension so in my
opinion it's an excellent medication
patients say do I get dependent on I say
you do not get dependent on it and H I
feel like you're better had you taken it
than had you not you take it for three
months you get strengthening of the
penal tissue what happens if I stop
taking it if you stop taking it there's
a wonderful study by a versa and what he
showed was that those patients that
stopped taking it after 3 months versus
Placebo still had benefit in terms of
endothelial function protection and
erectile function protection than those
people that took Placebo so thinking
about saying hey if I go to the gym and
I work out for three months what happens
if I stop I say well Stephen you're
better off had you gone to the gym for
three months that's my opinion what is
the downside they're side effects so
every drug has side effects right but
they're low with five milligrams back
pain stuffy nose um headache can occur
in these but it's quite small but I do
think that this is one of the
medications that really can make an
impact uh in men's health think about it
if I told you there's a medication that
protects your heart helps your prostate
and helps men with erections it's
affordable I think that most men would
say I'm in what are the big side effects
that people report when they're on seis
so on the larger dose headache stos back
pain is more common with Calis and other
medications um but it can be reported
remember you shouldn't take these
medications if you have you're taking a
nitrate because it can drop your blood
pressure um but other than that these
are very commonly used medications
throughout the world and they're not
suitable for certain people that have
certain cardiac disorders I'm guessing
well you know the way this was invented
uh this came at first one Viagra came
out in 1998 Viagra was in the clinical
trials designed to be a blood pressure
medication and accidentally men were
getting erections in the trial so these
medications are in my opinion
cardioprotective a guy named a very
famous uh physician B Dr cloner
published an article recently showing
that those men who took daily seis had
133% reduction in cardiac events and a
25% reduction in mortality that just
came out because of the potential
effects of protecting the endothelial
lining of the blood vessels how does
this work to solve for the sort of
psychogenic component that we talked
about that vicious cycle people get into
with like I'm guessing you're telling me
that increases your probability of
having a good erection right but this
still isn't really working on a liido is
it right so let's say um you started
falling through the Vicious Cycle and
you started having Ed and it was two
times three times and now I put you on
this medication and every time you have
sex you have the most amazing erection
of your life and 30 times 40 times three
six months go by and you're having these
amazing erections you're relaxed and
you're calm then I start going to every
other day you still get amazing
erections then I go to once a week you
still get amazing erections then I stop
you still get amazing erections right I
just need to show you that everything is
perfect again and that has a huge value
what about for women this is the
unfortunate part we don't have a lot of
treatment options for women and if you
look about it if I want to give you an
example in 2015 if you and I went into
the drugstore in the US Walgreens and
said give me all the drugs to treat
women to treat men for sexual
dysfunction they would put 30 drugs on
the counter these are all the wonderful
treatments for men in 2015 there was not
a single FDA approved drug to treat
women for any sexual dysfunction very
sad in 2015 the first drug to treat
women for female sexual dysfunction came
out and it was called ad or fanin and
fanin basically is a drug that a woman
takes every day and increases her desire
for sex that's it that's the FDA
indication increases her desire for sex
several years later the second drug for
women came out this was called VII or
brontide essentially it's an injection
that she takes 45 minutes prior to
intercourse and it increases her desire
for sex but again we have only two drugs
the reason being is because the research
the funding that we have for female
sexual dysfunction is far less than we
have for male sexual dysfunction and
it's unfortunate because as I mentioned
earlier this is a couple's disease and
so many times I have to use drugs that I
use for men to help treat women so I do
use Viagra for women but Viagra for
women helps arousal so let me explain
female sexual dysfunction has four
components one is decreased libido the
second is decreased arousal third is
orgasmic dysfunction and the fourth is
pain with intercourse these are the four
if a woman has any one of these four and
she's bothered by it she suffers from
female sexual dysfunction in the US
roughly 43 to 48% of women suffer from
female sexual dysfunction significant
number only 19% seek therapy will get
therapy so there's a huge number of
women that I say are suffering in
silence they suffer from the condition
they don't know where to get help and
unfortunately they're not many treatment
options available right so it's a big
problem and a big unmet
need and on the hormonal component you
talked about how if dopamine is up we're
much more likely to be aroused and if
serotonin is up then we're much less
likely to be ared correct so this kind
of ties into something I was thinking
when you were talking about stress and
tiredness when I'm stressed and tired is
my dopamine down it can be your cortisol
goes up right your C cortisol goes up so
your ability to get excited will go down
your fatigue goes up so it makes it much
more difficult these and there's more
than just dopamine and serotonin there's
norepinephrin there's melen Corton uh
there's many other neuro neurosteroids
and it's really just what we call a plus
minus game if I have more positives than
negatives I'm going to have desire and
I'm also going to have orgasm right
that's important also so if you give
someone uh too much serotonin and it
goes this way not only does a libido go
down but it's difficult to achieve
climax or an orgasm so one of the ways I
treat premature ejaculation is I give
them an anti-depressant because it
delays the orgasm so we have to be very
careful on these neurotransmitters how
we use them but if you talked about ad
the drug I mentioned all it does is it
increases dopamine and norepinephrine
which increases libido so they increase
neurosteroids many women particularly
with the hisyory breast cancer like this
because they don't want to use
testosterone or estrogen hormones this
is non hormonal right it's just neur
steroids increasing the desire for sex
can I think about dopamine and serotonin
as like a scales yes where if I if I put
weight on one end the other one goes up
and if I put weight on the other end the
other one goes up yes there is a very
famous uh Michael Perman came up with
the Tipping Point and it's basically a
scale looking at the pluses and the
minuses and if you have more pluses than
minuses liido goes up orgasmic function
goes up if you have more minuses
essentially your ability to orgasm and
your liido will go down so I want my if
I want to be aroused and have a desire
for sex and have good sex then I want my
dopamine levels to be high dopamine High
oxytocin High norepinephrine High
serotonin low what are the types of
activities that make my dopamine High uh
well um exercise is can be really high
dopamine other things increase dopamine
as well right so um gambling there's
there's certain things that are highs
like gambling anything that gives you a
high certain foods will cause a dopamine
Rush um but they're temporary right and
so that's a problem right because if it
goes up and it goes goes back down it
crash so you want your dopamine to go up
in men and women so we use medications
like Wellbutrin have you heard of
Wellbutrin it's an anti-depressant but
that anti-depressant increases dopamine
so I use that to help men increase their
libido or women to increase their libido
or sexual function I use ad e in men and
off label in men and in women to
increase dopamine I don't want to do
drugs though I don't want to take any
pills so then I would say I need you to
exercise and you do but exercise is
critical I need you to sleep I need you
to um reduce your stress right those
things will significantly improve uh
your libido so what things then lower
dopamine because I've spoken to a few
like dopamine expert experts on the show
before and they talked to me about this
sort of I mean Andrew hubman was telling
me that yeah when you do an exercise
like let's say gambling or go on Tik Tok
your dopamine's going to go up but then
it's going to crash below the base Point
yes and some of us live in this kind of
dopamine roller coaster where we're
doing these dopamine inducing activities
dopamine goes up it then crashes below
and when it gets low we have cravings
for dopamine inducing activi so we go
out and want to gamble or go on Tik Tok
again or eat something and then it goes
up again and then and we kind of live in
this kind of roller coaster of dopamine
one of the things that I was told by a
dopamine um expert on the show recently
that does that as well that links to
some things I found in your work is
pornography yes and when we talk about
this psychogenic component we talk about
um do dopamine
levels how much is pornography
causing this libido crisis yeah
pornography and Ed in libido is somewhat
controversial there's some data suggest
that it does not cause an issue and
there's some data suggest that it does
the first question I ask a patient when
I ask a man I say is your Ed present
with pornography also so if he says look
I have rectile dysfunction with my
partner and I have a rectile dysfunction
with pornography that's very different
than when he says I have a rectile
dysfunction with my partner and I have
amazing erections with uh pornography
right because then I know that there's a
psychogenic component as well this is
what I believe I believe that when a man
watches excessive amounts of pornography
what his expectation is becomes hair and
his reality becomes hair and that Delta
causes them to have erectile dysfunction
and low libido they're not getting what
they're expecting to get so many times I
question men when they come in uh all
when all men who come in for to ask how
much pornography are you watching in men
who watch excessive pornography if I ask
them to stop watching pornography for a
while many will report improvements in
their rectile function and libido so
again I do think that pornography in
excess can have a negative impact only
because of your expectation and your
reality the Delta uh can be an issue I'm
reading some stats here from jamama
Network that says the percentage of men
between 18 and 24 reporting no sexual
activity in the past year increased from
roughly 18 % to roughly 30% in the space
of what looks like just a few years and
simil similarly the average number of
times American adults engaged in sexual
activity per year has decreased from 60
between
1989 and
1994 to 50 roughly 50 between 2010 and
2024 these shifts suggest a notable
shift in sexual behavior over recent
decades why do you think this is
happening I think it's more
multifactorial so I think one is I think
that Ed and sexual dysfunction is on the
rise uh and if you look at uh the causes
for Ed uh it's very simple you look at
uh obesity diabetes metabolic syndrome
it's a pandemic it's an epidemic
throughout if you look at just diabetes
from 1990 to
2022 uh 100% 7% to 14% of the population
one out of eight people globally are
obese one out of eight people so these
can make it very difficult uh as obesity
and diabetes that go on the rise what
happens testosterone levels go down
right so testosterone levels go down so
the ability to engage in sexual activity
the desire to engage in SE activity will
be impaired by these uh conditions I've
got some some graphs here um which show
Global obesity Trends Global diabetes
Trends I'll put them on the screen for
anyone that's watching on video um also
there's been an increase in pornography
consumption from what I was able to tell
from doing some research a 2020 study by
the University of ant found that 40% of
people aged 35 to 45 who watched 300
minutes of porn a week had erectile
dysfunction in a 2021 study by GMA
public health and surveillance and 3,400
men between 18 and 35 years old 20% of
the participants suffered from erectile
dysfunction and researchers found that
the greater the viewing frequency of
pornography the greater the development
of this dysfunction yeah and that's 300
minutes is quite a bit of time a week 5
hours minutes five hours five hours a
week right so this so that's quite a bit
yeah that's quite a bit how important do
you think that is as a component to this
sort of fracturing relationships we
think about people having sex with each
other less yeah we're heading towards a
world of like virtual reality and AI yes
what role do you think that's genuinely
playing and you you must have private
conversations with men that are really
suffering with these things so I I
definitely think it's it's a role and it
definitely plays a factor but not as
much as the epidemic of diabetes obesity
metabolic syndrome we are as a
population becoming more and more
unhealthy right as time goes on and I
look at again as a piie it's
multifactorial right um most of us now
are not our socialization is virtual and
so we are not engaging and going into
seeing everything is done virtually and
so I think that's an issue um and so I
really believe that pornography is a
component but the the decline in overall
health is a major component the decline
in testosterone levels decade by decade
is also another component as well it's
pretty terrifying that young kids at the
age of like 12 13 14 when they open
their phones these days will be exposed
to sexually graphic images yeah whether
they CH chose to seek them out or not
yes and i' I've always wondered what
that's doing to a developing brain you
know how it's adjusting your
expectations how it's creating some of
those psychogenic factors that are
making you less aroused and um and it's
difficult right it's difficult to go out
and find a partner you have to like put
on the After Shave shave take care of
yourself you have to like Risk rejection
spend some money right be interesting
right so it seems like if from a
evolutionary perspective if I was just
trying to like get my nut off or like
yeah I don't know ejaculate I've got
this really easy way now like it's so
easy yes three clicks on a computer
We're Off to the Races versus like all
the effort and rejection and pain of of
trying to find an actual human being to
have sex with right and then when I do
do approach number one when I log on to
some website and click a couple of times
I'm getting no headache I'm getting
whatever I want I can order from a
endless list of menus and I'm sure in
the near future I'll even be able to
make my own yes and in not so distant
future I'll have I'll have it in my
house and it'll talk to me yes yeah so
it's a problem and you think about the
it's it's making it more difficult for
people to socialize right so in other
words now when patients or people engage
in sexual activity um and they're
usually having sex on the Internet or
with pornography when you actually have
actually engage in sexual activity with
another person it can be cause anxiety
right you get anxious it's not something
that you're doing regularly and so I
think that it can become an issue I amum
I saw an article this week from an only
fans Creator who posted that one one
customer of hers had given her $4
million this year oh my God and you
think about like you think about what it
would take for you to spend $4 million
on a parasocial relationship with an
only fans Creator sending you explicit
pictures
and I don't I don't quite believe we
fully understand what's around the
corner I agree these stats I think are
nothing compared to what's what's around
the corner
um and I I don't know I think about it a
lot
because when I read these stats about
erectile dysfunction being on the rise
and I I read that we're having sex less
and less um and then I see this rise in
these parasocial relationships I go
[__] know I think think we're just at
the start of an exponential curve um
let's talk about obesity then yeah
because these these stats here are
pretty shocking um this one shows the
global obesity Trends which just shows
them going straight up yes which is
horrific this one shows Global diabetes
Trends which is pretty much straight up
as well yes has there been any studies
done that show the link between being
overweight and your probability of
having low
libido and some kind of sexual
dysfunction issu yes numerous and so
let's start with this so obesity it's
not surprising that diabetes is going up
because as obesity goes up it causes
insulin resistance so obesity and
diabetes typically go hand in hand the
problem with obesity is the following
obesity significantly drops testosterone
levels so fat cells contain something
called aromatase aromatase eats up the
testosterone and converts it into
estrogen so the more fat you have the
less testosterone you'll have because
you'll convert it into estrogen fat
cells also secrete something called
cortisol and leptin which shut down your
own natural testosterone production so
as it's not Sur surprising that decade
by decade as you see an increase in
obesity you see a decline in
testosterone levels in men because the
testosterone levels will come down as
people become more obese and low
testosterone equals low libido low
testosterone increases low libido the
number one driver the number one hormone
for libido in men and women is
testosterone it's a strong driver men
and women men and women and don't forget
that testosterone is also signif really
important in erectile function men need
testosterone for sexual function so do
women right it's extremely important so
now I have a hormone that's going down
that's going to make it more difficult
to get an erection I have a hormone
that's going down that's going to
decrease my libido and it's mainly due
to this obesity that's occurring one of
the biggest factors so obesity obesity
also um uh if you look at the risk
factors for Ed obesity diabetes
cardiovascular disease these are all
risk factors and so as obesity goes up
erectile dysfunction goes up and the
number one condition is diabetes
diabetics are four times more likely to
have Ed than any other population four
times so I get worried when we see this
obesity diabetes pandemic going up
because it's increasing only the
erectile dysfunction um Stephen if you
look at the Obesity the group that's
having the greatest rise in obesity is
adolescence obesity not adult obesity
the kids younger and younger ages are
having that age group has the greatest
rise of obesity so what does that turn
into the younger population are starting
at at lower tea levels and has an
implication on fertility because you
need testosterone to produce sperm
that's very
important so if I just lose a little bit
of weight that'll have a big impact on
my testosterone levels let's talk about
that it's not a little bit so the best
study was at the European male aging
study Fred woo and what he showed was
this it's a bidirectional relationship
if you lose 10% of your body weight you
can actually gain 85 nanogram per deiler
in serum testosterone if you lose 15% of
your body weight you can actually gain
250 nanogram per deciliter in serum so
it's actually significant if you can
lose but it also goes the other way you
gain weight you drop the tea
proportionally as well the only issue is
I can get the patients to lose the
weight but I can't get them to sustain
it many times they gain it back right
but if they can keep the weight off it
significantly increase uh the
testosterone levels the the best data
we've seen is in the bariatric surgery
data if I do bariatric surgery on a
patient which to help them lose weight
weight you can shrink the stomach we do
surgery to help them lose weight they
lose quite a bit of weight their tea
levels go quite up right and so again
there is a strong correlation between
weight and testosterone have you gotten
examples
of patients where you've given them
testosterone treatment in some form
you've done something to increase their
toest testosterone and you've seen a
remarkable reported difference in their
sex life all the time yeah so so first
let's backtrack there's two ways to give
a person testosterone uh if I give a
young man testosterone remember it
causes infertility so you would never
give someone testosterone if they're
planning to have children right that's
very important right so I have two ways
to raise their testosterone I can give
you medications to raise your natural
testosterone there's several there's a
pill called chopine citrate there's HCG
I can use medications to raise your own
natural testosterone and they preserve
your fertility the second option is I
can give you medications like
testosterone there's seven of them but
they will shut your natural production
down not only will they shut your
natural testosterone production down but
they will shut down your sperm
production now if you've already had
your kids you're 60 years old your
testosterone level is already low in the
first place what are you preserving okay
it makes a lot of sense and there's
seven ways to do it my favorite way are
the injectables and the oral
testosterone they are fantastic oral
testosterone is quite interesting you
know first of all testosterone was
invented in 1935 this is not a new drug
1935 and oral testosterone initially was
feared because it would actually cause
liver toxicity and liver cancer and it
wasn't until the 1970s when they were
able to make oral testosterone uno8 and
what's nice about uno8 it bypasses the
liver no cancer but it had to be taken
three to four times a day it was
available in the UK as a drug called
andreal all over the world but not the
US the US we did not get our first oral
testosterone till 2019 and then 2022 we
received two more and now we have tando
jatenzo and Kaiser Trex is our oral
they're taking twice a day with a meal
what's nice about Kaiser TRX it's
actually available in the UK so in the
UK now they can actually get Kaiser TRX
as well but oral testosterone most
patients don't mind taking a pill uh it
seems very easy to do so should someone
like me be taking testosterone if your
levels are low yeah and you're
symptomatic and I think that's very
important if a man comes in with low
levels of testosterone and says I feel
great I have no symptoms I said I'm not
giving it to you these are the symptoms
low energy yeah low libido erectile
dysfunction decreased muscle mass
increased fat deposition poor sleep and
depression these are some of the common
symptoms you'll see most sensitive
symptoms are the sexual symptoms
erectile dysfunction and low libido so
if he says I have these symptoms and my
levels are low and I recheck it and
confirm that it's low that man is a
candidate for testosterone therapy
but if he's young hasn't had has have
children yet I'm going to say look let's
hold off on giving you testosterone and
use medications to make you make
testosterone and if you don't want to
take medications actually there are many
things you can do on lifestyle
modification to raise your testosterone
we talked about weight loss as well so
let's live in this area here you are too
young to take testosterone now but
conversely let's say a patient comes in
and has every single sign and symptom of
low testosterone but his testosterone
levels are normal I'm not giving him
testosterone because it could be
something else maybe he's depressed
maybe he has a low thyroid something
else is going on so you must have signs
and symptoms and a low tea level to be a
candidate and if you fit that then you
may benefit what about women so this is
important in 1935 when testosterone was
invented uh it wasn't many years later
till they actually started using
testosterone in women and early reports
of testosterone women were actually
quite remarkable the earlier manuscripts
describe improve uh quality of life
improve libido and if you and I walked
into the drugstore today and said give
me the testosterone for women it does
not exist there's not a single FDA proof
testost for women in the United States
um but we have well over a dozen for men
can you explain this to me just because
I want to make sure I'm clear why would
a woman take testosterone because when I
think of T testosterone I think of men
yes so women make more testosterone than
any other hormone in their body make
more testosterone than any other hormone
in their body right and when women have
higher levels of testosterone they tend
to see a greater Improvement in libido
muscle mass bone mineral density uh
sense of well-being uh some of reported
improvements in cognition as the
testosterone level goes down we start
seeing these symptoms particularly low
libido if you give a woman back her
testosterone she will many of these
women see a significant Improvement in
their libido but the issue is that we
don't have an FDA approved product for
testosterone in the United States I
think in the UK you call it off license
we call it off label now in the UK they
did have one they had a wonderful patch
called intrinsa and then the women in
the UK could get the patch for
testosterone go into the drugstore NHS
covered it and it was fine uh then they
had andram and andram was actually
approved and now no longer is approved
so now in the UK you also don't have an
onli medication the uh you can still get
andram from Australia but unfortunately
uh it's very difficult to get so do we
do we use the drugs for men and we give
it to the women in on10th the dose
that's all we do so if we have a packet
that's a man puts on a day we say use
one tenth of the packet every day for
the women and they can see significant
improvements it is not illegal to give a
woman testosterone it's just considered
off label or off license but they they
see significant improvements in what
sexual function by far the most libido
goes up no question I many women report
that muscle mass if you think of
testosterone bodybuilders take
testosterone for a reason why it
significantly improves muscle mass it
can decrease fat deposition many
patients will import improvements in
cognition it can help with bone mineral
density as well in men and women and I
also believe in depression so I think
testosterone does help with depression I
just want to just make a very important
Point testosterone is not just about sex
there are five other things that you
need to think about uh in men and women
and I want to talk about those men with
low testosterone l levels are much more
likely to have a heart attack
non-negotiable men with low testosterone
levels are much more likely to have
diabetes obesity men with low
testosterone levels are much more likely
to suffer from depression men with low
to have a bone fracture so it's not just
about sex it's about their overall
health and if you were to check one
blood test to assess a man's overall
health it's his testosterone level one
blood test to check his overall health
it will be because I have it affects
heart diabetes obesity um bone mental
density energy muscle mass erections
libido one blood test I can't think of
another blood test that is a better
barometer of overall health I want to
get clear on something because I've
heard people talking on my podcast
before about HRT yeah and women taking
HRT because of menopause and things like
that should they be does HRT have
testosterone in it no so typically when
we say HRT we're talking about estrogen
and progesterone typically yeah and
typically when we talk about trt
testosterone placement it's a little bit
different in a woman there's something I
call the triangle and it's just
basically estrogen progesterone and
testosterone just simple and if you have
a woman who's deplete in estrogen
testosterone and pro estrogen
progesterone testosterone and replace it
many of those women feel better right so
many of them do there are other hormones
that are also important I call it the
outside Circle cortisol thyroid growth
hormone we look at those as well and so
I think those are also very important
and I tell them we're going to going to
optimize your uh hormones but what
you're going we're going to optimize
your medical condition but that is only
50% of the story the other 50% again is
Diet exercise sleep and stress reduction
and if you do your part and I do my part
we're on fire we're absolutely on fire
but you have to do your part same with
men I put you on the testosterone I
optimize your medical conditions and but
you got to exercise you got to eat right
why aren't women being prescribed
testosterone then right because it's
considered well in many countries it's
on in Australia it's available in the UK
it was available and many women are
being prescribed testosterone it's just
off label it is the first time that I've
seen
someone on my show anyway really
emphasized the point that testosterone
isn't Just For Men it's for women as
well um and it can significantly improve
their quality of life talking about
testosterone one of the big
conversations that's rattling on on the
Internet is about this decline in male
test testosterone over the last couple
of years what exactly is that decline if
you had to sort of quantify it if you
look at the original studies we call it
the Framingham heart study back in the
70s testosterone levels were roughly
around the 700s average men between the
ages of 18 and 40 were around the 700s
and every decade we're starting to see a
decline almost by 50 nanogram per
deciliter and so the latest in the 2015
numbers are roughly in the mid 400 so
we've seen almost a 300 nanogram per
deiler decline in serum testosterone
which is significant because has two
implications uh it's not just about uh
the way you feel and um energy muscle
mass erectile function but that low
testosterone can have implications on
fertility that's really important so we
didn't talk about that but fertility
Testo sperm need testosterone low
testosterone decreases your sperm count
sperm counts have also been on the
decline as well so you know I think it's
really a testament to the fact that
decade by decade we're becoming a more
unhealthy population do you think that's
really the heart of it is that is the
sort of our diets and the way we live
and becoming more sedentary less
exercise more um processed food Etc do
you think that's the hard of I think
that's the key that's absolutely the key
the types of foods we eat the processed
foods that we eat high fructose High
carbohydrate diets um in and if you and
and the way we know that is just look at
the Obesity look at the look at the
diabetes there has to be a reason why
it's on the rise right and on that point
of fertility I'm in a season of life
where I'm going to be trying to have
kids pretty soon what's the most
important things I should be thinking
about from a lifestyle perspective in
your view yeah so I I tell patients
Darwinism in other words survival of the
fittest healthier people are more
fertile right you're passing on the
genes so uh so so essentially uh we tell
patients the number well the number one
cause of infertility in in the world for
men is a verical a verical is the
swelling of the veins around the
testicle you know how women sometimes
can get swelling of the veins in their
legs you see those veins that are kind
of obvious well men can get those veins
dilated around the testicle and those
varicoses can impair sperm production
now 15% of men in the world walk around
with varicus seals but up to 40% of men
with infertility will have verical so
it's really important to assess for the
varic casales but lifestyle modification
each one again diet exercise sleep have
been shown to help improve fertility in
men as well so I say healthier people
are more fertile I need you to start
getting healthier that's very important
we raise the testosterone level in many
of these men naturally we don't give it
to them to help improve their fertility
as well but check Stephen check your SE
analysis that's the simplest thing you
can do check it right I did yeah it's a
great predictor it's not just you know
there was so many amazing studies
showing that a semen analysis is a
phenomenal predictor of overall health
many studies showing that if your semen
analysis today is impaired it's a
predictor of you having comorbid
conditions today like diabetes obesity
metabolic syndrome it's also predictor
of prostate I mean Cancer so we know
that if you have infertility you're at a
higher risk of having testicular cancer
than those that don't have infertility
it's also a predictor of who will have
problems in the future Mike Eisenberg
once showed a very nice study men who
have low sperm counts uh can have a 30%
increased risk in diabetes 50% increased
risk in hemic heart disease in the
future uh Tom wall showed those men
could have 2.5 times higher risk of
high-grade prostate cancer in the future
so again to me it's just a marker of
overall health check the Sean analysis I
did that and it was quite I was actually
to be honest I was really quite nervous
about it because as someone who's you in
my early 30s and wants to have kids I
was really scared that it would come
back and say that like my sperm is um
dysfunctional and I've got a huge amount
of empathy and
um you know feelings for people that do
those analysis and get bad results back
15% of all couples in the world 15%
suffer from infertility that's a lot and
if you think about it um 30% of the time
it's a male Factor 30% 20% the time it's
a male and a female Factor combined so
indirectly a male is involved 50% of the
time when you have infer an infertile
couple and it can be devastating for
that couple I mean psychologically
devastating and what's also interesting
is that um most couples most couples 50%
of couples don't seek therapy and of
those couples that do seek therapy this
is globally only 25% of those couples uh
actually go forward uh and and and and
so I call this a group of individuals
that also suffer in silence they should
know that there are excellent treatment
options
available this um this graph that I had
printed out is just shocking to me it's
going back to the point about
testosterone but the the really shocking
thing is how quickly this has happened
yeah because this is the year 2000 and
this is the year 20156 year and the
decline there is from roughly
600 nanograms is it yes nanogram per
deciliter nanog per deciliter to roughly
for some age group groups here 400 yes m
per deciliter and that's only in 16
years yes so if you play that forward
another 16 years there's going to be a
bit of an infertility crisis there is
fortunately on that graph it's
plateauing a little bit which makes me
feel a little comfortable okay oh yeah
it is actually fling just a little bit
um but you're right it could be a
significant crisis um and again as I
mentioned it's the adolescence the
younger folks who are having the
greatest rise of obesity and that's
where fertility comes in because
fertility obesity in someone in 60s is
not concerned about fertility but a
young patient who has infertility
obesity will have a higher risk of
infertility if you're an entrepreneur
you're probably going to want to listen
to this it's a message from one of our
sponsors on this podcast which is
LinkedIn if you've listened to me on
this podcast for a while now you'll know
that I've been on a bit of an evolution
as a business owner and entrepreneur and
one of those Evolutions that has become
clearer and clearer as I've matured is
that the single most important thing in
building a business in building a
company is hiring the definition of the
word company is actually group of people
and that is the first responsibility and
job that any entrepreneur has and should
focus on but surprisingly most don't
about 80% of my team have been hired
from LinkedIn and I think there's very
few platforms if any in the world that
could give you that diversity of
candidate with that much information and
data on their profiles it usually cost
money but for the entrepreneurs that are
listening to me I've got you a free job
ad post for your company on LinkedIn
just go to LinkedIn .c doac to post your
free job ad today that's linkedin.com
doac terms and conditions apply if me
and my partner came to you and we said
listen we've got sexual problems in the
bedroom um what are the steps that you
would the things you'd look at that we
haven't focused on so much today is
there anything particular you'd say okay
and I I'm trying to stay away from being
prescribed a pill so I want to do
anything natural I can before I get to
that and then we'll talk about some of
the other more drastic measures one can
take natural things because everyone
wants to know about what's the natural
things I can do so when we talk about
diet there's certain diets that have
been helpful to improve sexual function
for me it's the Mediterranean diet the
Mediterranean diet is rich in whole
grains legumes um fruits vegetables and
if you look at red meat and sweets It's
once a month if you look at poultry it's
maybe once a week but mainly fish those
diets have typically been
anti-inflammatory diets many Studies
have shown that that diet can
significantly improve erectile function
and one study the medita trial actually
showed that it improves sexual function
in men and women so I'm a big believer
in using the Mediterranean diet when
Esposito did her first trial it was a
prospective trial 110 be obese men 55
men get the Mediterranean diet 55 men uh
don't get any intervention at all she
falls in prospectively for two years
what does she find not only a
significant Improvement in endothelial
function remember that lining of the
blood vessel but a significant
Improvement in erectile function in
these men no Viagra no pills nothing
simp simply changing the diet improved
the erectile function the same with
sexual function in women so that's an
important one the second is sleep let's
talk about sleep so studies show that if
you're getting less than six hours of
sleep a night it significant increases
your risk for sexual dysfunction in men
and women right your ideal amount of
sleep should be 7 to8 hours now let's
say you say well that makes sense maybe
I'm going to get sleep sleep for 9 to 10
hours because the more sleep I get the
better my sexual function but that's not
true it plateaus so if above 9 hours it
does not increase your ability or sexual
function so 7 to eight hours of sleep at
night I need you to get third is I
really need you to focus on um uh
exercise so I published a very nice
study looking at uh it was a metanalysis
on how much exercise one needs and what
type of exercise to actually improve
erectile function in this study
typically you need 160 minutes a week so
40 minutes four times a week for a
course of six months of moderate or to
severe exercise vigorous exercise and so
most people can get 160 minutes in a
week of exercise but that's getting your
heart rate up and doing the exercise
significantly improved erectile function
in men if you did that and the more
severe your Ed was the greater
Improvement you saw in erectile function
strictly by exercise alone no other
intervention St just exercise so here
you have a patient that now starts doing
some exercise starts sleeping better
starts changing the diet it's all
additive you are now sick significantly
improving erectile function just by
lifestyle modification
alone pretty profound that exercise can
have such a big impact isn't it is that
the same for women it is true because
many of the things so unfortunately once
again the research we have in women is
not close to what we have in men but the
med trial was also in women the sleep
studies were also in women um and so
these studies also show that sexual
function can be improved with um uh
sleep and with diet um I think that men
and women are not that different I mean
if you see a significant Improvement in
a male sexual function uh with diet
exercise sleep um you can also see it in
women as well actually there was a great
study this looked at 110 women and they
had coronary artery stenosis they did
angiograms on 110 women and they showed
that the greater her stenosis she had
the worse her sexual function so the
greater the blockage in her heart the
worse her sexual function they put those
women on a cardiac rehab program to
actually improve their cardiac function
so a diet and ex exercise program and
those women that actually put through
the were through the program fourfold
increase almost in their sexual function
well 400% fourfold that's right because
we use a questionnaire called the fsfi
which is a questionnaire so significant
Improvement in sexual function just on
improving cardiac function so remember
cardiac function and sexual function are
related and it's bidirectional you
improve one you improve the other it's
very important we didn't we talked about
this earlier 40% of men in the in the
world at 40 will suffer U from erectile
dysfunction 40% 40% Jes 50% at 50 60% at
60 70 at 70 80 80 you do the math it
essentially is a very prevalent
condition this condition is associated
with increased cardiovascular vents it's
a first sign of a heart attack we talked
about that this condition is associated
with two and a half times more likely to
be anxious three and a half times more
likely to suffer from depression and
this condition is also associated with
diabetes in other words men with Ed two
times more likely to have undiagnosed
diabetes and yet only 50% of men even
talk about it because they're so
embarrassed so you show me another
condition in the world that affects more
men's lives that's associated more
adverse conditions and they're too
embarrassed to speak about it they
suffer in silence there's not another
condition there's not another condition
but yet we're embarrassed to discuss it
I used to give these lectures and I
would look out to the audience I'd say
please raise your hand if you suffer
from
hypertension and many people raise their
hand and they have high blood pressure
they say okay please raise your hand if
you suffer from sexual dysfunction no
hands go up but statistically you know
that over 50% of those people had sexual
dysfunction so why is it okay to raise
your hand if you have hypertension but
not okay to raise your hand if you have
sexual dysfunction it's got to stop we
have to destigmatize it's okay to have
sexual dysfunction it's a common
Condition it's curable why don't men
raise their hands from a psychological
standpoint why is that I think they're
embarrassed I think that I think that
we're historically sexual dysfunction
looks as a like a weakness I'm not a man
less of a man you know you have
hypertension it doesn't mean you're less
of a man right but they have this
assumption that it's a weakness a less
of a man and I and I think that it's
okay you have to be comfortable saying
that you have sexual dysfunction there
are amazing treatment options for sexual
dysfunction amazing that work very very
well you just have to raise your hand
and let me know that you have it I just
want to make one other comment about
diabetes there was a study that came out
of St Louis looking at young men 18 to
40 years old and they were screening
them for erectile dysfunction and what
they found was when those men came in
for erectile dysfunction 30% of those
men had pre-diabetes or diabetes on that
day on the day they were being diagnosed
30% and I thought to myself young men do
not go get screened I remember when I
was 30 years old I didn't go in for my
annual blood pressure check and my anual
sugar check there's no way I'd get my
glucose checked but if I young man gets
erectile dysfunction he is at my front
door first thing tomorrow morning they
show up that's the first thing they're
going to do because it's a very big
condition to them and they want to get
treated and that is the opportunity to
treat these young men and treat the
condition if you see a young man or
someone who comes in for Ed and you
screen them for uh diabetes and I catch
the diabetes at 30 as opposed to 40 that
is 10 years of damage on the vessels
that you're saving because you catch the
disease early early so Ed is the gateway
to Men's Health and to treating men
early before it's too late so I really
use Sexual Health as a tool a vehicle to
improve overall health because men take
Sexual Health much more seriously
particularly young men have you ever had
sexual dysfunction I have not never in
your life I have not I have I have
not it doesn't mean that it's not but
it's okay if I did it's not it's there's
nothing wrong with it right there's
nothing it's normal it's okay and it's
it can be temporary and come back right
it's it's nothing wrong with having
sexual dysfunction we must destigmatize
it it's completely Okay the reason I'm
sharing this is because if anyone else
has been in the situations the
situations I've been in are um generally
my sex life has been been good my whole
life but there's been certain times with
certain Partners or you know you might
be drunk a little bit or in the day when
I was single there was like the oldd
person who for some reason it just
wasn't working for me
and or there was other instances in a
previous relationship where near the end
of the relationship I'd like lose my
erection during sex and that became a
little bit bothersome for me because I
was like oh my God like it almost made
me not want to have sleep with this
person or it convinced me that maybe I
don't like them anymore or something
else was going on and for me it has
always been what's the word used
psychogenic yes it's always been in my
head that the problems have arose and
the other part of thing that I've
experienced a lot is in terms of libido
I have like no libido
when actually slight
different when I'm when work is very
very busy and I'm very very tired and I
come home very very
late it's not that I'm not horny but I
just the act of sex is just really
unappealing but you're just like
everyone else you're not unique when it
comes to that yeah but that much of my
life is like that like I come home late
a lot and
so I'm I'm I'm like tired and stressed
quite a lot right but what if I took you
and your partner and put you on a
beautiful island in Hawaii for two week
we have great sex okay yeah so that's
what we kind of like how we've
orientated our life honestly okay that's
genuinely how we've orientated our life
because I just don't think the way I
obviously want to make lifestyle changes
to make sure that I'm not always coming
home tired and stressed at 11: p.m. but
one of the things that's really helped
us is you know going away on the
weekends right and going away maybe on
Friday and coming back on Monday and
getting out of the same context so like
getting out of the house going to a even
like going to a hotel room it's actually
a bit of a game changer that you can
just like go to a hotel room in the same
city like a Booker station yes and that
seems to have a big impact because it
just removes you from the context right
and then like yeah going away for the
weekends holidays and stuff a lot of my
friends say to me they go when they're
struggling with their sex life they just
like book A book a local a local sort of
station yeah and I wonder why also I
don't have kids so I've not experienced
the impact that kids can have have a
significant impact really right because
it increases your stress
right particularly for your many times
for the partner as well so if you both
are stressed because of the children sex
goes lower and lower on the totem slept
as well right if you're not sleeping if
you to wake up and like oh gosh isn't
there stats that say like when someone
has a kid their sex life like vanishes
for 18 months or something I don't know
I'm not familiar with that St but I
believe it I believe it I believe it I
read something about post having a kid
liido but also like sexual function it
makes sense I see it in in couples and
particularly you know many times um it's
take years for them to start engaging
sexual because the stress is so high
particularly when they originally have
the child there was a British study done
that found over 80% of women experienced
sexual problems 3 months postpartum with
nearly two3 still affected at 6 months
yes which is which is a lot of it's a
lot of women a lot of women and that's
significant amount of time so what about
premature ejaculation let's talk about
it very important 30 so sexual
disfunction we've been talking about Ed
today right but there's many different
types of sexual dysfunction there's
premature ejaculation there's Peron
disease there's delayed ejaculation
we're just focusing on one aspect
premature ejaculation affects 30% of men
globally 30% of men how do you define
that there's two ways to think about it
when they come in you have to figure out
is this lifelong going their whole life
or is this acquired it's very important
because it takes me down two different
roads if you say look I've never had
premature ejaculation and yesterday it
started that's very different than if
you come to me and say my whole life I
had premature ejaculation and we now
Define premature ejaculation as having
an ejaculation less than 2 minutes used
to be 1 minute less than 2 minutes you
have to have a loss of control like I
couldn't control it and you have to be
bothered by it so if you tell me Stephen
look I ejaculate in 30 seconds and I'm
happy I say great then we're done you
know you are content you have to be
bothered by the condition the EAC
average ejaculatory time in the United
States is 5.4 minutes on average right
the average time for a woman to achieve
orgasm is typically 13.4 minutes so
there's a big discrepancy here as you
can see right so 30% of men suffer uh
but we know that only a small percentage
of these men 9% of these men will ever
seek therapy and it can be a significant
problem in a relationship um uh and that
needs to be addressed okay so there's
not like a time limit it's not like okay
if you're coming within two minutes then
you got a problem well let's say you're
not bothered by it let's say you and
your partner are completely satisfied
with it what's the problem okay what's
the problem and and sometimes let if you
think about acquired uh means that
typically we Define it as 50% less than
your normal time so if you say look I
typically used to ejaculate in 8 minutes
and now it's 4 minutes and it's
bothering me I'd say okay that that's an
issue um you know so we talk it's
relative what what's comfortable for you
and some men will say you know so I
think it's very important to look at the
definition the treatment options are
actually quite simple one of the best
treatment options is sex therapy because
we can train your mind we can train you
to delay that ejaculation there's
techniques the start stop technique The
Squeeze technique how we can delay it no
but there is but most men say just give
me a pill I don't I don't have the time
for this just give me a pill but there
are ways to do it with Sex Therapy which
I think are fantastic sex therapy is a
cure the pill is just a Band-Aid right
Sex Therapy is a cure but the pills that
we use the most common Ed pills are
anti-depressants because they increase
serotonin and make it harder to
ejaculate well that's what we want in
this situation we want to delay the
ejaculation so we can use
anti-depressants they sometimes have be
taken daily which work better or you may
have to take it on demand but if you
take it on demand 6 to8 hours ahead of
time so you need some notice but there's
going to be significant side effects of
taking anti-depressants there are side
effects of anti-depressants so I try to
stay away from them and the other ones I
try to use are topical Liane sprays
because if I decrease the sensitivity of
the penis you're more likely to be able
to engage in sexual activity for a
longer period of time so those are
commonly used so sex therapy and sprays
are very easy to use you don't need a
prescription for sprays uh and they're
common
use one thing that we have to talk about
that's really important is the Traverse
trial it's really big everyone
historically has always said that
testosterone is dangerous it causes
prostate cancer and it causes a heart
attack and a stroke and in 2015 there
were some studies that suggested
testosterone may cause a heart attack
before 2015 all the studies suggested
that there was no increased risk so in
the United States they mandated that
there' be a large trial 5,200 patients
six years long strictly to decide does
testosterone increase the risk of a
heart attack so myself and eight others
designed the study ran the study for six
years and we published it last year it
finally came out and it showed that
there was no significant increase in
cardiovascular events finally but until
that time until that came out many
people said I still believe that
testosterone causes a heart attack but
when the Traverse trial came out the
largest randomized speciic control trial
ever published we finally showed that
giving testosterone didn't not increase
the risk of a heart attack in fact the
study also showed it did not increase
the risk of prostate cancer many people
were worried that testosterone causes
prostate cancer and no negative effect
on urinary symptoms so many people have
thought that if I give testosterone the
urinary symptoms become worse the study
showed no worsening of urinary symptoms
so very important study the Traverse
trial finally came out it's the largest
trial in men ever published on
testosterone will it reduce my
lifespan will at low testosterone I
believe will reduce your lifespan I mean
taking like testosterone injections and
stuff sometimes I think about like again
I don't don't really know what I'm
talking about here but I think
about athletes taking steroids different
those athletes are taking super
physiologic steroids so the normal range
is typically 300 to a th000 is the
normal range and they will take
testosterone levels to much higher 2,
2500 okay and there's a reason for
that um there's something called a
plateau effect so so if you take
testosterone and you have better libido
you intuitively would think if I take
more testosterone I'll feel even better
liido but that's not true is's a certain
point at which it plateaus so the more
you take you've already hit an onoff
button you've hit it you're done the
exception is muscle the more
testosterone you your body sees the more
it upregulates uh Androgen receptors in
the muscle and you put on more muscle so
bodybuilders are addicted to higher
levels of testosterone but they're also
taking other off Lael medications anavar
Deca wistol they're taking other
medications and those testosterone
formulations have a lower androgenic
ratio androgenic means facial hair acne
they're more anabolic so it's very
different than what you're taking You're
simply what you would be taking is just
all you're trying to do is take a
medication that you had before and put
yourself back into the normal range
nothing fancy so I The more I've learned
about testosterone The more I've started
to think that maybe when I've had my
kids and I'm done having kids and maybe
I'm
45 um I should consider it providing
that my levels are low and you're
symptomatic if you're 45 and you say I
feel great I'm gonna say Stephen you're
not getting it right I feel great so if
you say look I'm 45 my levels are low
and I'm starting to have symptoms say
Okay Now's the Time to consider taking
the medication those symptoms you said
were like tiredness energy levels well
the most specific are my libido's gone
down
my are worse my Energy's gone down
increased fat deposition decreased
muscle mass poor sleep and depression
and we have to talk about depression so
uh earlier on in my career I conducted a
very large trial looking at depression
in testosterone and we had almost 850
patients and we showed that men with low
testosterone levels were much more
likely to suffer from depression almost
92% of those men with low testosterone
had some degree of depression and when
we treated 17% of those men actually had
severe depression we treated these men
for one year with testosterone
supplementation that 177% dropped down
to 2% now I'm not advocating to treat
major depressive disorder with
testosterone but what I am advocating
for is to at least check a testosterone
level in men who are depressed because
it can help them in fact in our study
even the men who were on an
anti-depressant uh like say Prozac we
put them on testosterone those men also
saw significant improvements in
depression so may be some Synergy
between testosterone and what we call
SSR eyes so again it's very important to
check a testosterone level in men who
suffer from depression you wrote a book
called recoupling yes a couple's
four-step guide to Greater intimacy yes
and better sex yes what are the four
steps in this book and you wrote this
alongside over 10 years ago yes so I
wrote it with the sex therapist she's an
amazing sex therapist her name is Mary
Joe Rini and we decided to write a book
together to really help couples get
through so the four steps really are
number one foremost communication
you got to communicate you got to at
least be able to tell each other did you
know that only 44% of men who start
developing Ed even tell their Partners
now think about that You' say what do
you mean they don't tell their partner
you know what they do they just start
avoiding sex they just start avoiding
sex so they got to communicate number
one and making excuses right I if if I
lost my reaction i' I'd probably say oh
sorry I'm just tired or you know because
I want to just on this point there's
much of the reason why it's hard to
communicate
is because it it can sound a lot like
blame and it also can make someone feel
like you're not into them right so if I
said and maybe you're not that into them
and also maybe you're not like that
attracted to them so like that could be
yeah that's an issue and that's why the
sex therapist is amazing right that's
what they do right that's what they do
they work through these issues with
couples and they're fantastic but the
number one step we put in the book was
communication you have to communicate
the second chapter was my main chapter
what I wrote about what can we do to
improve sexual dysfunction in men and
women testosterone placement therapy
using Viagra vaginal lubrications local
vaginal estrogen therapy we didn't talk
about that it's critical for
postmenopausal woman local vaginal
estrogen therapy is very important
decreases this risk of UTI decreases
pain with intercourse um so very
important um the third chapter really
sir what is that vaginal so uh younger
women have estrogen in the vagina that
estrogen is so important it keeps all
the bad bacteria away and keeps the good
bacteria within the vagina it keeps the
W the lining of the wall thick it allows
for the vaginal wall to function with
arousal properly and as she gets older
and she goes through menopause the
estrogen goes away the bad bacteria come
in the risk of urinary tract infections
go up the wall starts to atrophy means
gets thinner it's more susceptible to
injury and tear it hurts okay right so
you can't ask a woman to enjoy sex if it
hurts every time she has sex a lot of
women I've heard a lot of women talking
about that about this idea that the
reason they don't like to have sex is
because it hurts it hurts because when
they lose the estrogen the wall gets
very thin and it can tear it hurts but
even young women young women but it's
usually typically a different reason
they could suffer from vaginismus
there's other things that could cause
the cultis but in old older women the
most common cause is atrophy of the
vaginal wall because of the lack of
estrogen so what do you do you give back
local estrogen therapy it can be in the
form of a suppository form of a cream it
doesn't happen overnight I tell my
patients it can take up to three months
but after three months they notice a
difference and the urinary tract
infections go away the pain goes down
right so these are simple things that
women can do to help because again if
someone's having pain with intercourse
man or woman they will tend to avoid it
right it's an important concept so the
second chapter is really important on
what are the many different things that
you can do to improve your sexual
function uh the third chapter is really
about intimacy it's the really the
intimacy and the fourth chapter really
is uh ways to improve uh your sexual
experience it was written by my sex
therapist she talks about vibrators
masturbation so there's a four-step
guide um that I think is very helpful
and I think what's unique about this
book is that really it's it's really two
perspectives it's one who is the um the
medical care that I provide and the
psychological care that she provides now
she's obviously handling the
psychological side of things and she's
not here but just on this point of
improving communication what is the best
advice you give to people that are
currently in a situation where they're
both kind of suffering in silence
because they're just not communicating
with each other number one most
important is time we don't spend enough
time it's basically the shadows in the
night you coming in I'm going out and
it's you have to make time that's
extremely important and the second one
is open dialogue you have to be able to
express to your partner what you're
suffering from otherwise you can't get
treated you just have to be able to
express it but time I think is important
and open communication and dialogue um
there's nothing embarrassing about this
it really is um something that needs to
be D destigmatized and the consequences
of addressing it so couples who engage
in regular sexual activity have a
significant Improvement in their quality
of their relationship they tend to be
happier and suffer from less uh me uh
depression I mean there's there's there
are physical and emotional benefits from
regular sexual activity in the um opener
of the book where you start talking
about communication there's a sentence
that
says when sex isn't going well it can
become 90% of the relationship and
couples seldom know how to communicate
about any of these problems and that is
true you know we've done a couple of
conversations now on the DIY about sex
and Intimacy in these subjects and the
amount of messages that I get from
couples saying that everything else in
their relationship is great yeah
everything is great love this person so
much but there's this massive elephant
in the room right no pun intended which
is um the lack of sexual intimacy now
when we talk about sexual
intimacy does it mean penetration yeah
it doesn't because we with the
definition of sex span is the ability
and the desire to engage in satisfying
sexual activity I have patients that
come to me and say we do not have
penetrative sex but we have a wonderful
sex life I say great if this is working
for you because it's satisfying sexual
activity you're set right it's if you
want penetrative sex and you cannot have
it then we will address it and we can
fix it but you get to Define Stephen you
define what is satisfying sexual
activity on chapter four where you talk
about things like vibrators and stuff
like that um I know that was the a
chapter handled by your sex therapist
according to what you said is there any
risk that using vibrators or other toys
and tools will impact
normal intimacy without vibrators like
is there any studies that say okay you
get desensitized to the real thing if
you start using a vibrator yeah I've
seen the opposite I've seen that the
studies showing that vibrators and these
kinds of uh Toys can actually enhance
the ability of the relationship so that
you can because you're communicating as
you're doing it right so you're
communicating with your partner what is
giving me pleasure what is not giving me
pleasure you're learning about each
other it's a great tool to use to learn
about each other so when you're engaging
a sexual activity you're more aware I
think it was a a game changer to me I'm
going to be honest I think like just
having having other things do you know
why do you know why it's a game changer
and I'm not just talking about vibrators
I'm talking about all toys in the
bedroom whether it's like dice or
handcuffs or whether it's something else
or blindfold is just because novelty
doing new things for me is so critical
as it relates to being excited sexually
yeah and there's only so many things you
can
do there's kind of there's a a a
relatively limited list of things you
could do if you're not bringing in other
tools and toys and stuff you know so I
think that for me it actually has helped
me to prolong the novelty of my sexual
um relationship in a way that nobody
told me about before yeah because I
think think as a guy especially I think
you kind of think that toys are
something your partner buys for herself
maybe yeah something she uses for
herself and now I think if anything I'm
the instigator of using other things
yeah that's chapter four I mean and we
and we prescribe vibrator for men we use
something called vict it helps with men
with delayed orgasmia these toys can be
very helpful in a
relationship I think she prefers the
toys to me personally but that's another
conversation for another time in terms
of energy there are so many reasons why
I'm a big matcha fan if you don't
already know by now and so much so that
I actually invested in the UK's leading
matcha company called perfect Ted and
one of my favorite perfect Ted products
is these delicious matcha pouches that
come in every flavor from salted caramel
to Peach flavor to mint flavor to Berry
flavor one of my favorites is this
vanilla flavor which I'm going to make
in just two seconds you just take this
mixer here get a little bit of the
powder pop it on top of the shaker like
that put the lid
on shake shake
shake delicious if you haven't tried
this yet you can find perfect Tad at
Tesco and Holland Barrett stores or
online where you can get 40% off with my
code diary 40 head to perfect ted.com
and put in code diary 40 to try this
delicious multi-flavored match now
highly recommend and if you do it please
tag me send me a message online what's
the um what's the most important thing
we haven't talked about that we should
have well there's a couple things I want
to talk about one is we didn't talk
about Peroni disease it's an important
disease 9% of men in the world suffer
from Peron disease 9% of men in the
world Peron disease is an abnormal
coverture of the penis when it's erect
so I want you to think about this the
way I can describe it is I have a
balloon I put a piece of tap tape on the
balloon I blow the balloon up what's
going to happen it's going to curve in
the direction of the tape right so if a
penis curves greater than 60 degrees
it's prohibitive for intercourse these
men are suffer many of these men suffer
from severe depression it's
disfigurement it's disfigurement of the
penis right so think about it 9% of men
in the world suffer from this condition
and most men have never even heard what
Peron disease is and uh essentially in
the US we have now one FDA approved
treatment for this it's an injection
called collagenase where we can put an
injection into the Rock plaque and break
it up there are surgeries that we can do
to make the penis straight again but
again it's very important to realize
that patients who have Peron disease are
also suffering in silence they don't
know where to get the treatment and
there are many good treatment options
whether it be surgical or medical to
solve this condition so you know my
whole takea away from this is this is
that I know that millions of people
right now men and women are suffering
from sexual dysfunction I know they're
silent and they're not saying a word
because they don't know where to go they
don't know what to do but they have to
realize that there are excellent
treatment options available and they
should seek therapy they're not
suffering
alone what
else I want you to think about sexual
dysfunction as no no longer a Band-Aid
uh we are not looking for Viagra we are
looking for a cure we want a cure for ED
and a cure for ED could be based on many
things as I mentioned earlier diet
exercise sleep stress we've also moved
into a new generation of regenerative
Therapies in my field stem cells PRP
shock wave therapy now we're starting to
look at radio frequency in our
laboratory we're looking at hyperbaric
oxygen men are looking for ways to cure
this condition they no longer want to
take a pill uh to solve the problem and
so I think that's very important um and
many of these uh new therapies are
promising I think Shockwave therapy is
very promising where we have a device
that deliver shocks to the penal tissue
we' been doing this it's like um [__]
like said that but but I'll tell you it
we've been doing it now for 5 years um
and uh it was invented in 2010 it's
actually quite brilliant if I take your
finger and I take a hammer and I hit
your finger multiple times what do you
think your finger is going to do your
finger is going to start bringing in new
blood vessels and new ways to heal your
finger so before Urology the
cardiologists have been doing it for the
heart for many years and they would
shock the heart many times and you would
see new blood vessels formed it's called
neoangiogenesis orthopedic surgeons have
been doing it for a long period of time
in terms of injury in terms of healing
injury that use shock wave therapy we
are new to the game but what we see is
when you give these shocks it can
potentially improve the blood flow and
sexual function in men and I think the
new era could potentially be hyperbaric
oxygen therapy and also radio frequency
radio frequency is a a way to increase
heat within the tissue and improve
sexual function as well so again I think
what you're going to see uh 5 to 10
years as we move forward is new ways to
cure erectile dysfunction stem cells
potentially have some promise as well
but patients don't want a pill anymore
one thing we haven't talked directly
about but we've talked about it
indirectly is the role that trauma plays
in sexual dysfunction and Trauma in all
of its forms um I think I had a partner
who was very public again about the fact
that the reason why they had sexual
dysfunction was because in their view
because they had been through a sort of
traumatic experience how often do you
see that in your office how long often
do you see a patient come to you man or
woman with a some kind of trauma we we
we query all men and women if they've
had any kind of trauma sexual or just
physical trauma it doesn't have to be
sexual trauma be any kind of physical
trauma um I will tell you that
most patients don't disclose or not very
commonly described to have having it but
they will many times disclose it to the
sex therapist and I'll find out on the
back end to be honest with you um but I
think when someone discloses sexual
trauma or trauma it takes more of a
relationship and time on the first visit
sometimes they're not
forthcoming what's that that you haven't
in front of you on the desk it's I've
been hesitating talking about it so this
is a penal implant oh gosh and this yes
that's exactly what it is and this is a
device that was invented in
1973 by a very famous uh urologist named
Dr Brantley Scott Brantley Scott I will
have to brag a little bit was from my
institution at Bay College of Medicine
and this has been around for 51 years
and the the penis actually has two
bodies sitting on top and they has the
urethra sitting on the bottom and those
two bodies have muscle inside them or
casing and what this device is a surgery
that I warm quite often where we put
these balloons or cylinders into those
two bodies and fill them up there's a
small pump that goes into the scrotum
and there's a small Reservoir that just
holds water normal saline that goes
behind the pubic bone typically when a
man squeezes this he starts filling up
these cylinders with water and it gives
him a very rigid very good erection when
he finishes engaging in sexual activity
he'll press this button here and it will
actually release and all the fluid will
come out of the penal bodies and go back
into that Reservoir so theoretically
anyone who's willing to have this
surgery we can cure Ed but it's a
surgery and what's the consequence and
cost of that in terms of sexual
experience monetary cost I would say
that in the US Medicare covers this
product so that's that's actually quite
good in terms of pleasure and Men report
no significant decline in pleasure if
you look at overall satisfaction is
greater than 92% for patient and partner
with uh with the penal prosthesis so um
it is a very um it's a GameChanger it
really is a GameChanger most patients
have never heard of it or most people
have never heard of this uh penal
prosthesis um but you know let's be
honest you know if you had a bad
shoulder you'd get a prosthetic if you
had a bad hip you get a prosthetic it's
a prosthetic that fixes an organ um and
it Stephen it the satisfaction rate is
extremely high but I'll tell you
something you owe me something because
when I brought this on the plane uh and
I went through security they made me
pulled us out and explain what this was
and nobody had heard of it no one had
seen this um yeah well I had to explain
it and I had to pump it up and show them
and uh but I had a little bit of an
audience but um yes but I will tell you
this this is a this is something that
really has revolutionized the way we
treat men for rectile
dysfunction but this is surely like a
last ditch attempt it is because it is a
lastage attempt because if I take it out
no other treatments will ever work again
oh really it's it's the end right so if
I take it out no other the treatments
will work again so I want you to try
every single option before we come to
this what situation does someone have to
be in for you to insert this into their
penis so remember when I told you that
40% man at 40 50% at 50 and most
patients will take Viagra but I told you
Viagra is not a cure it's a Band-Aid so
what's going to happen that Viagra is
just like that pain pill and that pain
pill eventually going to happen is you
can't walk well the same thing happens
with Ed eventually the meds stop working
so once the meds stop working and then
the second level we use something called
penal injections some manual we use
penal injections once you've tried
everything and nothing works what are
you going to do okay so this is like a
last what are you going to do if you
still want to get but if I look at
satisfaction rates if I give men
questionnaires for the pill for the
injections vacuum reduction device for
the implant High highest satisfaction
with the
implant at what point how what you mean
how satisfied from the starting point to
right if I because from starting at a
point where I'm completely unable to get
an erection right if anyone helps me get
that thing up my satisfaction is going
to be really high right but let's say
you have an erection with a pill you get
an erection with an injection you get an
erection with a vacuum and you get an
erection with this all all four you know
over time gave you an erection which
gave you the best erection and which
which one were you most satisfied with
this will win it's crazy and can you
still ejaculate with this yes no
issues
gosh
no I mean again I have I have tremendous
sympathy because it's ruins people's
lives right it does if if you can't
perform in that way and it destroys your
relationships and relationships are like
the essence of life so but essentially
you're taking someone who can't have sex
who can now have sex again and some
would argue that they can have sex
whenever they want as long as they want
with this device right it only goes down
when you tell it to go down Dr Mo we
have a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're going to be leaving it for yeah
and the question that has been left for
you no is have you ever experienced
anything that you cannot explain from a
position of rational
materialism yeah I mean I think so many
things in science that we can't explain
so many things that are idiopathic that
I have no explanation for um uh for
example for fertility which is something
we talked about 40% of men who come to
me our explanation is no explanation we
don't know why you're infertile right so
obviously that's very uncomfortable for
many patients to hear that but many
things in science I have no explanation
for um and many things that I do have an
explanation for we find out 10 years
later were
wrong um so I think that's what comes to
mind what about any personal experiences
at all in your life spiritual religious
yeah um I'm very spiritual I'm very
religious um sometimes death it's hard
to explain hard to understand why um
it's real I see it every day uh you know
we see it we do at work um my I see it
personally in my own life my father
passed away at an early age um from
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis um it's a
very it's a condition where your lungs
start to scar it's probably the worst
condition you could asked for and um and
he had have a lung transplant at 70 so
he pretty young um and he retired at 69
um and said you know one he worked very
hard he was a general surgeon single you
know solo practice and um he said one
day I'll enjoy one day I'll enjoy and
then at 69 he retires he's ready to
enjoy at 70 gets idiopathic pulm
fibrosis at 70 gets a lung transplant
and lives for five years with someone
else's lungs um which is pretty tough um
and his one message was you know don't
wait till the end enjoy the ride I wish
I'd enjoyed the ride because waiting to
the end um sometimes there may be no
end and by that I interpreted that to me
that he had worked his whole life very
very hard extremely hard and he sort of
delayed the gratification to a point
that right it didn't really come
necessarily he thought it would come at
70 and he' enjoy the last 15 years and
enjoy but at 60 9 he got idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis at 70 we got a lung
transplant and at 75 he passed away and
I think that um if anything I Learned
was don't wait to the end enjoy the ride
are you doing that I am every second I
can and how how do you do that sort of
practically when you're so busy so I
make time I meditate every morning I
work out every morning I have my own
time to myself I pray I'm very religious
I think those are very important things
to keep me going um I spend I I it's
it's God family work patience I mean
it's an order my family is extremely
important to me and I make time for them
as well and uh I think that keeps me
grounded Dr Mo thank you thank you for
the work you're doing because as you say
in your work there's a huge proportion
of people couples men women that are
suffering in silence and there are in
search of answers and there's not a lot
of people in your friendship group that
are necessarily going to know this stuff
or even talk about their own experiences
with this I think it's important to have
these kinds of conversations um that
anyone in the private or comfort of
their own home or with their airpods on
can tune into to get a better
understanding if there was a closing
message for for those people that are
suffering in silence in some way whether
they're couples
individuals what is that closing message
to
them it's okay to suffer from sexual
dysfunction it's normal as we age and
there are many treatment options good
treatment options that can help you
today and I ask you to seek therapy
raise your hand tell your doctor you
suffer from sexual dysfunction because
they're excellent treatment options and
if people want to learn more about you
and your work where's the best place for
them to find you well uh it's my website
Dr drit cara.com and um sexan health.com
I have sexan health.com where you can
learn all the different ways to improve
lifestyle modification I started a
nonprofit I just want you to know called
the testosterone project just so you
know that uh it's really geared at
education advocacy for testosterone
we're trying to get testosterone approv
for women in the United States I that's
important we're trying to get testing
done uh as well we want everyone to be
tested for testosterone it should be
Norm as well and we're trying to get it
deregulated so the test aom project.com
is a great way to get information as
well I'll put all of those links below
Dr May thank you so much for the work
you're doing and please do keep doing it
because it's so incredibly important
Stephen pleasure to talk to you thankk
you do you know that 80% of New Year's
resolutions fail by February it's
because we focus too much on the end
goal and we forget the small daily
actions that actually move us forward
those actions that are easy to do are
also easy not to do in life it's easy to
save a dollar so it's also easy not to
making one small Improvement each day
one tiny step in the right direction has
a big difference over time and that is
the 1% mindset which is why we created
the 1% diary a 90day journal designed to
help you stay consistent and focus on
the small wins and make real progress
over time it also gives you access to
the 1% Community a space where you can
stay accountable motivated inspired
along with many others on the same jour
Jour we launched the 1% diary in
November and it sold out so now we're
doing a second drop join the wait list
at theed diary.com and you'll be the
first to know as soon as it's back in
stock I'll put the link below
[Music]
oh